Add order confirmation chapter (#9)
melange-re/melange-for-react-devs: docs/order-confirmation/index.md

However, this would be a very bad idea! Now changing the constructors in
`Item.t` would not force you to change `Item.toPrice` accordingly. A superior
version would be:

```reason
let toPrice = t =>
  switch (t) {
  | Sandwich => 10.
  | Burger => 10.
  };
```

Since OCaml's pattern-matching syntax allows you to combine branches, you can
simplify it to:

```reason
let toPrice = t =>
  switch (t) {
  | Sandwich
  | Burger => 10.
  };
```

In any case, you should strive to avoid wildcards. The OCaml Way is to
explicitly match all constructors in your switch expressions.

## A `fun` syntax for switch

There's an alternate, shorter syntax for functions whose entire body is a switch
expression. It's called `fun`, and we can rewrite `Item.toPrice` to use it:

<<< Snippets.re#to-price-fun

We can also define `toEmoji` using the `fun` syntax:

<<< Snippets.re#to-emoji

Using the `fun` syntax is completely equivalent to using a switch expression,
so it's up to your personal taste whether you want to use one or the other.

## `Item.make`

Now we're ready to define the `make` function which will render the `Item`
component:

<<< Snippets.re#make

> The `make` function has a single labeled argument, `~item`, of type `t`. This

Reviewer: Would this make sense? A bit redundant, but might help clarifying:

```suggestion
The `make` function has a single labeled argument, `~item`, of type `Item.t`. This
```

Author: Changed from t to Item.t in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/1176139f21ab3f49ad208600197414645ab21349

`React.element`.

To better see what types are at play, it might make sense to refactor
`Order.make` like so:

<<< Snippets.re#order-make-item-rows{5,9}

This way you can hover over `itemRows` and see that it has type
`array(React.element)`.

## `Index.re`

Render the `Order` component inside `src/order-confirmation/Index.re`:

<<< Snippets.re#index

Run `make serve` inside `src/order-confirmation` to see your new app in action.

## `Js.Array.mapi`

Open your browser's dev console, where you should see a warning:

```
Warning: Each child in a list should have a unique "key" prop.
```

Oops, we forgot the set the `key` props! One way to fix this is to use
[Js.Array.mapi](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/index.html#val-mapi)
instead[^4] so we can set `key` based on the index of the element:

<<< Snippets.re#mapi

The `Js.Array.mapi` function is also a binding to the `Array.map` method, but
unlike `Js.Array.map`, it passes the element *and the index* into the callback.
If you hover over it, you'll see that it has the type signature

```
(('a, int) => 'b, array('a)) => array('b)
```

In practice, it's common for Melange bindings do not match one-to-one to their

> JavaScript counterparts.

Reviewer: This sentence is strangely constructed, maybe this?

```suggestion
In practice, it's common for Melange bindings to not match one-to-one their
JavaScript counterparts.
```

Reviewer: The sentence is also a bit misleading. The JavaScript API [includes the index](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map#index) as well. Maybe something like: 

> It's common for Melange bindings to represent JavaScript APIs with optional arguments using multiple OCaml externals.

Can link to this section: https://melange.re/v2.1.0/communicate-with-javascript/#approach-1-multiple-external-functions

Author: Added the link and tried to make the statement more specific in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/132bda1fb279291c5568538cd73d505882f29947

# Order Confirmation

The famed restauranteur Madame Jellobutter has opened a hot new pop-up
restaurant called Emoji Cafe, and you've been commissioned to build the order
confirmation widget on its website. Feeling adventurous, you decide to build it

> using Melange.

Reviewer: Love this intro 👩‍🍳

Start by creating a new directory `src/order-confirmation` and give it the
same directory structure as we showed you in the previous chapter:

```
src/order-confirmation
├─ dune
├─ Index.re
├─ Makefile
└─ Item.re
```

The `dune` file can be copied from any of the existing projects. The `Makefile`
can also be copied over, but remember to update the value of the `app`
environment variable to `order-confirmation`. The `.re` files can be empty for
now.

## Variant type `t`

For the time being, there are only two items you can order at Emoji Cafe, the
sandwich or the burger. In `Item.re`, add a new type:

<<< Snippets.re#type-t

This is *variant type*[^1] named `t` with two *constructors*, `Sandwich` and
`Burger`. In OCaml, it is customary for the primary type of a module to be

> called `t`.

Reviewer: Maybe we could mention here that even if `t` is not meaningful, the convention makes sense in OCaml because the type will be referenced from outside the module namespaced with the module name itself, e.g. `Item.t`.

Author: Good idea, renamed this section to "Variant type Item.t" and added a clarifying phrase in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/2d781b22683c4d4a73d09aaa99ed1b263fe69af2

The `Item` module should contain modules that help us render an item, and to do
that, we'll need functions that can return the price and the emoji[^2] for a
given item. First, add the `toPrice` function:

<<< Snippets.re#to-price

If you decide to add, say, a hotdog, to the menu, you would need to:

- Add a `Hotdog` constructor to `Order.t`
- Add a `| Hotdog` branch to the switch expression of `Order.toPrice`

Your OCaml code wouldn't compile if you just added a new constructor to
`Item.t` without also updating `Item.toPrice`. Adding or removing constructors

> from a variant usually forces you to change relevant parts of your code.

Reviewer: "usually"? Sounds like the compiler is not precise sometimes 😄

Author: Got rid of "usually" in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/commit/2d781b22683c4d4a73d09aaa99ed1b263fe69af2. Also in the commit: added a new section about wildcard in switch expression to explain the case when adding or removing constructors wouldn't force you to change your code.

## `fun` sugar syntax

> Incidentally, there's a sugar syntax for functions whose entire body is a switch

Reviewer: Why "Incidentally"? Maybe can be removed? I am also not sure about using "syntax sugar", I remember when I started using BuckleScript and Reason that this term would be thrown around, and I had no clue what it meant for a while 😅 i think it's a term mostly people familiar with parsers and programming langs might be familiar with, but maybe can be written in a different way:

```suggestion
There's an alternate, shorter way to write functions whose entire body is a `switch`
```

Author: Stopped using the term syntax sugar in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/895b759401c4755a626d9ff3427daf49e5913ff0

expression. It's called `fun`, and we can rewrite `Item.toPrice` to use it:

<<< Snippets.re#to-price-fun

We can also define `toEmoji` using the `fun` sugar syntax:

<<< Snippets.re#to-emoji

> Using the `fun` syntax is completely equivalent to using a switch expression,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `fun` syntax is completely equivalent to using a `switch` expression,
```
?

Author: I've been purposefully writing things like ternary expression, if-else expression, etc without the backticks because they're syntax elements that any functional language might have. I guess switch expression is a bit on the fence, though, because the languages that had it earliest tend to use the `match` keyword (Haskell, OCaml, F#, etc). On the other hand, some of the most popular languages that have it actually do use the `switch` keyword (Swift, C#, Dart, Java).

I don't have a very strong opinion on this, though, if you prefer I write it as `switch` expression, I'll open another PR after this one to change it in all the other chapters.

Reviewer: I don't have a strong opinion either. Can stay as is. :)

> so it's up to your personal taste whether you want to use this sugar syntax.

Reviewer: To be consistent with suggestion above:

```suggestion
so it's up to your personal taste whether you want to use one way or the other.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/895b759401c4755a626d9ff3427daf49e5913ff0

## `Order.make`

Now we're ready to define the `make` function which will render the `Item`
component:

<<< Snippets.re#make

The `make` function has a single labeled argument, `~item`, of type `t`. This
effectively means the `Item` component has a single prop named `item`.

Note that this renders a single row of a table. We'll need another component
to render a table containing all items in an order.

## `Order` component

Create a new file `src/order-confirmation/Order.re` and add the following code:

<<< Snippets.re#order

There's a lot going on here:

- The primary type of `Order` is `array(Item.t)`, which is an array of
  variants.
- The `make` function has a single labeled argument, `~items`, of type `t`.
  This means the `Order` component has a single prop named `items`.
- We sum up the prices of all items using
  [Js.Array.reduce](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/index.html#val-reduce).

>   This is identical to JavaScript's [Array.reduce

Reviewer: I'm not sure if I'd say it is identical, but rather mention something like:

> `Js.Array.reduce` are the bindings to the JavaScript `Array.reduce` method.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/68a424d719ae72ce8db6353e1abbed94ee0f2b8f

  method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/reduce),

>   except that the Melange version requires the initial value to be passed in.

Reviewer: I don't think there's a good reason for this, maybe we could make it optional 🤔

- For each order, we render an `Item` component via
  [Js.Array.map](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/index.html#val-map),

>   which is equivalent to the [Array.map

Reviewer: Same comment about "equivalent", I'd mention it's the binding.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/68a424d719ae72ce8db6353e1abbed94ee0f2b8f

  method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map).
- The `React.array` function has the type signature `array(React.element) =>
  React.element`, meaning it converts an array of `React.element`s to

>   `React.element`. All expressions in JSX must have the type `React.element`.

Reviewer: This is not accurate. JSX transforms to function calls, so the expressions can be really anything. Even ReasonReact is lenient in that sense, as uppercase components can take any type as children.

There are two reasons why `React.array` is needed here:
- We are rendering a `tbody` element, and all lowercase elements expect their children to be of type `React.element`
- We are "concatenating" the array of items with the "total" row

I am not sure how to explain this easily, maybe say something like:

> React allows to combine an array of children with a single element, like we are doing here with the array of items and the row that shows the total. But OCaml type system needs all elements in a collection to have the same type, so we convert the array of items to a `React.element` using `React.array`.

Author: I tried to tackle this by adding an entire section for this instead of relegating it to a single bullet point: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/c85c07af3b7a875e9de643730cabce55df6dbf3e

## `Index.re`

Render the `Order` component inside `Index.re`:

<<< Snippets.re#index

Run `make serve` inside `src/order-confirmation` to see your new app in action.
Open your browser's dev console, where you should see a warning:

```
Warning: Each child in a list should have a unique "key" prop.
```

Oops, we should've used

> [Js.Array.mapi](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/index.html#val-mapi)[^3]

Reviewer: Not sure if we should do this, in general it's not recommended to use indexes as keys, or generate the keys at render time: https://react.dev/learn/rendering-lists#rules-of-keys

Maybe the order could be a record `{id: 1, item: Sandwich}`?

Author: This is a very good point, but I think it's a "useful mistake". I think I should stick to my plan of introducing records in the next chapter, and fix it there. Wdyt?

Reviewer: Sounds good. Maybe briefly mention something like "this is not recommended per [this link](https://react.dev/learn/rendering-lists#rules-of-keys) but we'll fix it soon" might give readers a heads up?

Author: I added a footnote about this in https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/pull/9/commits/8e4c39fbd9849a3e57d9b01841fc85190b6d3adb

```
[^4]: Using array indexes to set keys violates [React's rules of
    keys](https://react.dev/learn/rendering-lists#rules-of-keys), which states
    that you shouldn't generate keys while rendering. We'll see a better way to
    do this [later](/todo).
```

instead so we could set the `key` prop for each `Item` component:

<<< Snippets.re#mapi

You've got a basic component now, but it looks... not so great.[^4]

## Style with CSS

Let's add styling, but instead of using the `style` prop as we did in previous
chapters, let's use good old CSS. First, install `style-loader` and `css-loader`
webpack plugins:

```
npm install --save-dev css-loader style-loader
```

Add a new rule to `webpack.config.js` so that you can import .css files as
modules:

<<< @/../webpack.config.js{5-12}

Add a new file
`src/order-confirmation/item.css` and give it these styles:

<<< @/../src/order-confirmation/item.css

## `mel.raw` extension node

In OCaml, there is no syntax to import from files, because all modules within a
project are visible to all other modules[^5]. However, we can make use of
JavaScript's `import` syntax by using the [mel.raw extension
node](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/communicate-with-javascript/#generate-raw-javascript),
which allows us to embed raw JavaScript in our OCaml code. Add the following
code to the top of `Item.re`:

```reason

> [%%mel.raw {|import "./item.css"|}];

Reviewer: This is minor, but I wonder if it'd be better to use `module`?

```suggestion
[@module "./item.css"] external css: string = "default";
ignore(css);
```

`mel.raw` with `import` is simpler, but I'm not sure if it could break if the module system changes from `es6` to `commonjs`.

Author: > if the module system changes from es6 to commonjs

What would be the motivation to change frontend code to `commonjs`?

Reviewer: Who knows. I've seen much worse 😄 in any case, not a big deal. Can stay as is.

Author: Since I'm moving all the styling stuff to the next chapter, I'll add the `@mel.module` approach there

```

The `{|` and `|}` are string delimiters which allow you to define a string that
doesn't require you to escape characters like double-quote and newline. They are
similar to the `{js|` and `|js}`
delimiters we first saw in the [Celsius
Converter](/celsius-converter-exception/#solutions) chapter, with the
difference that they aren't JavaScript strings so they won't handle Unicode correctly.

Unfortunately, in the terminal where we're running `make serve`, we see this webpack compilation error:

```
ERROR in ./_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation/Item.js 5:0-6:1

> Module not found: Error: Can't resolve './item.css' in '/home/fhsu/work/melange-for-react-devs/_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Module not found: Error: Can't resolve './item.css' in '~/melange-for-react-devs/_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation'
```

Author: This part was removed from this PR, will reappear in next PR

Finally, add a `mel.raw` extension node at the top of `Order.re`:

```reason
[%%mel.raw {|import "./order.css"|}];
```

Excelsior! Madame Jellobutter is pleased with your progress on the order
confirmation widget. But she plans to add more options for her current menu
items, for example she'd like to more than one type of sandwich. We'll tackle
that in the next chapter.

## Exercises

<b>1.</b> We used the `%%mel.raw` extension node to import CSS files as modules,
but there is also a `%mel.raw` extension node. What happens if you use
`%mel.raw` instead?

<b>2.</b> Add another a `Hotdog` constructor to `Item.t` variant type. Update
the `Item` module's helper functions to get your program to compile again.

<b>3.</b> Instead of repeatedly using `value |>
Js.Float.toFixedWithPrecision(~digits=2)
|> React.string`, add a helper function `Format.currency` that does
the same thing.

## Overview

- By convention, the main type in a module is often named `t`
- A variant is a type that has one or more constructors
  - Adding or removing constructors forces you to change the relevant parts of
    your code
- The `fun` sugar syntax helps you save a little bit of typing when you have a

>   function whose entire body is a switch expression

Reviewer: `swit
```suggestion
  function whose entire body is a `switch` expression
```

    method
  - The `Js.Array.map` and `Js.Array.mapi` functions can be used in place of
    JavaScripts `Array.map` method
- The `React.array` function is needed when you want to convert an array of
  `React.element`s to a single `React.element`
- `mel.raw` extension node is used to embed raw JavaScript in our OCaml code
- The `runtime_deps` field of the `melange.emit` stanza is used to copy assets
  like `.css` files into our build directory

## Solutions

<b>1.</b> If we use `%mel.raw` instead of `%%mel.raw` in `Item.re`, we'll get this webpack
compilation error:

```bash
ERROR in ./_build/default/src/order-confirmation/output/src/order-confirmation/Item.js 5:9
Module parse failed: Unexpected token (5:9)
You may need an appropriate loader to handle this file type, currently no loaders are configured to process this file. See https://webpack.js.org/concepts#loaders
| import * as JsxRuntime from "react/jsx-runtime";
|
> ((import "./item.css"));
```

So `%mel.raw` surrounds the JavaScript code you put into it because it wants to
treat it as an expression. Whereas `%%mel.raw` treats the JavaScript it's given

> as a statement. If you change it back to `%%mel.raw`, the generated JavaScript

Reviewer: Another big difference that I learnt about recently is that `%%mel.raw` is always generated in the corresponding JS file generated from the original module where the extension is used, while `%mel.raw` can sometimes be inlined in the places where the expression is used from. Not sure if it's worth mentioning though 😅

Author: I'll leave this detail out for now. But who knows, maybe it'll come up later :sweat_smile:

will look like this:

```javascript
import "./item.css"
;
```

<b>2.</b> After you add a `HotDog` constructor to `Item.t`, your `Item` module
should look something like this:

<<< Snippets.re#hotdog

Of course, you may have chosen a different price for the hotdog.

<b>3.</b> In order to create a helper function `Format.currency`, we must create
a new module file called `Format.re` and add a `currency` function:

<<< @/../src/order-confirmation/Format.re

Then we can use that function like this:

```reason
<td className="price"> {item |> toPrice |> Format.currency} </td>
```

-----

[Source code for this
chapter](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs/blob/main/src/order-confirmation/)
can be found in the [Melange for React Developers
repo](https://github.com/melange-re/melange-for-react-devs).

[^1]: Variant types have no equivalent in JavaScript, but they are similar to
    TypeScript's [union

>     enums](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/enums.html#union-enums-and-enum-member-types)

Reviewer: It's sad that the restaurant example doesn't leverage variant payloads / arguments, which is the greatest difference with TypeScript enums. I guess you have plans to use them in a future chapter?

Author: Yes, I felt this chapter was already long enough, so I was going to discuss variant arguments in the next chapter, in particular allow there to be Sandwiches that have different kinds of fillings

[^2]: Recall that the name of this restaurant is Emoji Cafe, so everything from
  the menu to the order confirmation must use emojis.

[^3]: Note that unlike JavaScript's [Array.map
  method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/map),
  we have to use
  [Js.Array.mapi](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/index.html#val-mapi)
  instead of
  [Js.Array.map](https://melange.re/v2.1.0/api/re/melange/Js/Array/index.html#val-map)
  if we want to use the index value.

[^4]: Madame Jellobutter was passing by and just happened to catch a glimpse of

>   the unstyled component over your shoulder and puked in her mouth a little.

Reviewer: lolwat
